<img src="https://github.com/bbarker505/ddrp_v2/blob/master/images/DDRP_logo2.png" width="300"/> <img src="https://github.com/bbarker505/ddrp_v2/blob/master/images/OSU_IPMC_horizontal_2C_O_over_B.png" width="300"/> 

üë• Brittany Barker, Len Coop, Tyson Wepprich, Gericke Cook, and Dan Upper

Questions? üìß bbarker505@gmail.com or brittany.barker@oregonstate.edu

# An introduction to DDRP

Invasive pests present a significant threat to agricultural production
in the United States, yet decision support tools that can accurately
predict where and when to expect pests have not yet been fully developed
and utilized. Our spatial modeling platform known as DDRP (Degree-Days,
Risk, and Phenological event mapping) was designed to provide regularly
updated forecasts of the potential distribution (risk of establishment)
and timing of seasonal activities (phenology) of pests [(Barker et
al.¬†2020)](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0244005). Currently we
are using DDRP to produce regularly updated (every three days) forecasts
for 15 high-risk pest insects for the USDA APHIS Cooperative
Agricultural Pest Survey (CAPS) program, available at
[USPest.org](http://uspest.org/CAPS). The program has also been adapted
to predict the phenology and voltinism (number of generations per year)
of three biological control insects that have photoperiod-cued diapause
[(Grevstad et al.¬†2022)](https://doi.org/10.1002/eap.2557), also available at
[USPest.org](http://uspest.org/dd/dodmaps).

![Model
overview](https://github.com/bbarker505/ddrp_v2/blob/master/images/model_overview.png?raw=true)

# Inputs and outputs

DDRP uses a process-based (mechanistic) approach to model
temperature-dependent development, phenology, and climate suitability of
target species. The platform requires gridded daily minimum and maximum
temperature data, and information on the temperature requirements for
development and survival of a species. We typically run DDRP using
current and forecast climate data for the conterminous U.S. to provide
real-time decision support for a species; however, the platform accepts
data for any time frame or region, such as data for past years or for
other countries. Model products include maps of the predicted potential
distribution (climate-based risk of establishment), number of
generations, and dates of phenological events. The potential
distribution is represented by areas where cold and heat stress
accumulations have not exceeded the stress limits of a species.

# Program features

Some of the major features of DDRP currently include:  
1) Degree-day parameters including durations and lower and upper
developmental thresholds for four separate life stages (these are the
egg, the larva or nymph, the pupa or pre-oviposition, and the adult),
plus a separately parameterized overwintering stage.  
2) The ability to spread the population using cohorts. Typically seven
cohorts are specified but any number can be used. While cohorts offer
the ability to spread the population in a Gaussian or other
distribution, there is currently no distributed-delay function, meaning
that the spread does not increase over multiple generations.  
3) Phenological event maps (PEMs, also known as pest event maps), which
depict estimated calendar dates of seasonal activities or population
events. PEM parameters are specified as degree-days within each of the
four (plus overwintering) stages. For example, DDRP can be parameterized
to make first egg-hatch PEMs by setting a degree-day value near the
completion of the egg stage, or at the beginning of the larval stage. If
the former is used, then a second PEM, say for mid-larval development,
could be parameterized using a value such as one-half of the degree-day
total for larval development.  
4) Climatic suitability maps, which show two levels of climatic
suitability (moderate and severe stress exclusions). These are intended
to indicate risk likelihood of short vs.¬†long-term establishment but
could also indicate migration zones, and uncertainties such as in
species parameterization, model structure, and in the sources of climate
data.

# Setup and usage

DDRP is an R script (‚ÄúDDRP\_v2.R‚Äù) and must be within the same directory
an auxilliary R script that contains program functions
(‚ÄúDDRP\_v2\_funcs.R‚Äù). DDRP has not yet been formatted into an R package
because we designed the code to be run from the command line on a Linux
server. The program can also be run on a Windows system but parallel
processing capabilities will be limited. The [user
manual](https://github.com/bbarker505/ddrp_v2/blob/master/DDRP_user_guide_and_platform_requirements_V4.pdf)
(Coop and Barker 2020)
‚ÄúDDRP\_user\_guide\_and\_platform\_requirements\_V4.pdf‚Äù is the only
instruction document that is currently available, but stay tuned on the
development of an R package for DDRP and a vignette on how to use the
platform. The instruction manual provides information on program
requirements, input data, input options, examples of command line
arguments, types of output files, and run times.

# Philosophy

Our development of DDRP has strived to achieve a parsimonious balance of
both model simplicity and accuracy, with a focus on four philosophies:  
1) Simplicity, in that existing data and results for well-studied, major
invasive threats can be readily adapted for use  
2) Universality, to accommodate a wide range of organisms  
3) Robustness, by having the emphasis on use of first-principles that
lend to process-driven rather than statistical correlation-driven
models  
4) Practicality, by focusing on models that can be used for decision
support rather than more complex research-only models

# Example outputs

The movie below shows DDRP outputs of the emergence of overwintered
adults of emerald ash borer, *Agrilus planipennis*, over the course of 2022. The potential distribution is defined as areas not excluded by severe or moderate climate stress (excl.-sev and excl.-mod, respectively). 

![Movie](https://github.com/bbarker505/ddrp_v2/blob/master/images/EAB_2022_Adults.png)

Another way to look at this (mostly) same information is with a
phenological event map for the emergence of overwintered emerald ash borer adults, below.  

![PEM](https://github.com/bbarker505/ddrp_v2/blob/master/images/EAB_Avg_PEMp0Excl2_20221231.png)

Generation and stage maps for emerald ash borer in 2022 in the movie below depict the expected life stage of any given generation over the year.  

![Movie](https://github.com/bbarker505/ddrp_v2/blob/master/images/EAB_2022_StageCount.png)

Maps of voltinism (number of generations per year) can provide insight into expected pest pressure over the year. The maps below shows expected voltinism for light brown apple moth, *Epiphyas postvittana*, a major pest of economically important fruits including apple, pear, orange, and grape. The first map depicts the potential distribution as areas not excluded by severe climate stress, whereas the second maps depicts it as areas not excluded by severe or moderate climate stress.

![PEM](https://github.com/bbarker505/ddrp_v2/blob/master/images/LBAM_NumGen_Excl1_20221231.png?raw=TRUE)

![PEM](https://github.com/bbarker505/ddrp_v2/blob/master/images/LBAM_NumGen_Excl2_20221231.png?raw=TRUE)

# Acknowledgements

The development of DDRP was funded by the USDA APHIS PPQ Cooperative
Agricultural Pest Survey (CAPS) and Center for Plant Health Science and
Technology (CPHST) programs, the USDA National Institute of Food and
Agriculture (NIFA), and the Department of Defense Strategic
Environmental Research and Development Program (SERDP).

# References

Barker, B. S., L. Coop, T. Wepprich, F. Grevstad, and G. Cook. 2020.
DDRP: real-time phenology and climatic suitability modeling of invasive
insects. PLoS ONE 15:e0244005.
<https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0244005>.

Coop, L., and B. S. Barker. 2020. Computing infrastructure requirements
and user guide for hosting DDRP models. Prepared for APHIS PPQ and other
collaborators. Available
[here](https://github.com/bbarker505/ddrp_v2/blob/master/DDRP_user_guide_and_platform_requirements_V4.pdf).

Grevstad, F. G., T. Wepprich, B. S. Barker, L. B. Coop, R. Shaw, and R.
S. Bourchier. 2022. Combining photoperiod and thermal responses to
predict phenological mismatch for introduced insects. Ecological
Applications. e2557. <https://doi.org/10.1002/eap.2557>.
